README.md, before:

# Creating a kubernetes cluster on multiple KVM virtual machines

<sup>FEDORA NOTICE&YMMV, libvirt network needs root -> always sudo vagrant</sup>

## Prerequisites

- Linux host with about 12GB of RAM
- [libvirt](https://libvirt.org/)
- [qemu-kvm](https://www.qemu.org/)
- [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/)
- [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/)

## Creating a cluster of nodes

### Setup a network bridge for KVM

1. Show active interfaces, take note of the one you want to bridge

    ```console
    $ nmcli con show --active
    NAME                UUID                                  TYPE      DEVICE
    Wired1              3e1e1b5d-1b0b-4b0e-9e0a-1b0b4b0e9e0a  ethernet  enp2s0
    CENSORED            45b17347-1a0c-4b0e-8d0f-4b0e8d0f4b0e  wifi      wlo1
    ```

1. Create bridge interface

    ```console
    $ nmcli con add ifname br0 type bridge con-name br0
    Connection 'br0' (f5075153-2aef-4a61-9be7-887021b54c8e) successfully added.
    ```

1. Link Bridge Interface to Real Interface (enp2s0 on this recipe)

    ```console
    $ nmcli con add type bridge-slave ifname enp2s0 master br0
    Connection 'bridge-slave-enp2s0' (b9b264d8-59c8-4200-85a6-bc6e221c392d)
    successfully added.
    ```

1. Bring up the new bridge, this'll take down the original interface

    ```console
    $ nmcli con up br0 && nmcli con up bridge-slave-enp2s0
    Connection successfully activated (master waiting for slaves) (D-Bus active
    path: /org/freedesktop/NetworkManager/ActiveConnection/10)
    Connection successfully activated (D-Bus active path: /org/freedesktop/Netwo
    rkManager/ActiveConnection/11)
    ```

1. Verify libvirt networks:

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh net-list --all
    Name          State    Autostart   Persistent
    ------------------------------------------------
    default       active   yes         yes
    host-bridge   active   yes         yes
    ```

1. Create a new network for the bridge:

    ```console
    $ cat <<EOF >bridge.xml
    <network>
        <name>host-bridge</name>
        <forward mode="bridge"/>
        <bridge name="br0"/>
    </network>
    EOF

    $ sudo virsh net-define bridge.xml   # okay to delete after
    Network host-bridge defined from bridge.xml
    ```

1. Start the network:

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh net-start host-bridge
    Network host-bridge started

    $ sudo virsh net-autostart host-bridge
    Network host-bridge marked as autostarted
    ```

1. Verify libvirt networks:

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh net-list --all
    Name          State    Autostart   Persistent
    ------------------------------------------------
    default       active   yes         yes
    host-bridge   active   yes         yes
    ```

### Create VMs

1. Read, validate and edit the [`Vagrantfile`](./Vagrantfile) to your needs

you might want to change the following:

- WORKER_COUNT: the number of worker nodes to create (total node count)
= 1 master + WORKER_COUNT
- cpu count & memory size

    ```ruby
    libvirt.cpus = 2
    libvirt.memory = 4096
    ```

    2GB RAM works but complex deployments will run out of memory

1. Create the VMs

    ```console
    $ sudo vagrant up
    ...
    ==> worker-1: Machine booted and ready!
    ==> master: Machine booted and ready!
    ==> worker-1: Setting hostname...
    ==> master: Setting hostname...
    ==> worker-2: Machine booted and ready!
    ==> worker-2: Setting hostname...
    ==> master: Configuring and enabling network interfaces...
    ==> worker-1: Configuring and enabling network interfaces...
    ==> worker-2: Configuring and enabling network interfaces...
    ```

1. Verify VMs are running

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh list --all
     Id   Name                     State
    -----------------------------------------
     1    baremetal-k8s_master     running
     2    baremetal-k8s_worker-1   running
     3    baremetal-k8s_worker-2   running
     ...
    ```

1. Verify `master` is live on `br0`

    ```console
    $ ping 192.168.1.170
    PING 192.168.1.170 (192.168.1.170) 56(84) bytes of data.
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.285 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=2 ttl=64 time=0.241 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=3 ttl=64 time=0.243 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=4 ttl=64 time=0.568 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=5 ttl=64 time=0.174 ms
    ^C
    --- 192.168.1.170 ping statistics ---
    5 packets transmitted, 5 received, 0% packet loss, time 4093ms
    rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 0.174/0.302/0.568/0.137 ms
    ```

Commit message:

more robust ssh key definition to help with ansible

README.md, after:

# Creating a kubernetes cluster on multiple KVM virtual machines

<sup>FEDORA NOTICE&YMMV, libvirt network needs root -> always sudo vagrant, TODO god no please no root</sup>

## Prerequisites

- Linux host with about 12GB of RAM
- [libvirt](https://libvirt.org/)
- [qemu-kvm](https://www.qemu.org/)
- [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/)
- [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/)

## Creating a cluster of nodes

### Setup a network bridge for KVM

1. Show active interfaces, take note of the one you want to bridge

    ```console
    $ nmcli con show --active
    NAME                UUID                                  TYPE      DEVICE
    Wired1              3e1e1b5d-1b0b-4b0e-9e0a-1b0b4b0e9e0a  ethernet  enp2s0
    CENSORED            45b17347-1a0c-4b0e-8d0f-4b0e8d0f4b0e  wifi      wlo1
    ```

1. Create bridge interface

    ```console
    $ nmcli con add ifname br0 type bridge con-name br0
    Connection 'br0' (f5075153-2aef-4a61-9be7-887021b54c8e) successfully added.
    ```

1. Link Bridge Interface to Real Interface (enp2s0 on this recipe)

    ```console
    $ nmcli con add type bridge-slave ifname enp2s0 master br0
    Connection 'bridge-slave-enp2s0' (b9b264d8-59c8-4200-85a6-bc6e221c392d)
    successfully added.
    ```

1. Bring up the new bridge, this'll take down the original interface

    ```console
    $ nmcli con up br0 && nmcli con up bridge-slave-enp2s0
    Connection successfully activated (master waiting for slaves) (D-Bus active
    path: /org/freedesktop/NetworkManager/ActiveConnection/10)
    Connection successfully activated (D-Bus active path: /org/freedesktop/Netwo
    rkManager/ActiveConnection/11)
    ```

1. Verify libvirt networks:

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh net-list --all
    Name          State    Autostart   Persistent
    ------------------------------------------------
    default       active   yes         yes
    host-bridge   active   yes         yes
    ```

1. Create a new network for the bridge:

    ```console
    $ cat <<EOF >bridge.xml
    <network>
        <name>host-bridge</name>
        <forward mode="bridge"/>
        <bridge name="br0"/>
    </network>
    EOF

    $ sudo virsh net-define bridge.xml   # okay to delete after
    Network host-bridge defined from bridge.xml
    ```

1. Start the network:

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh net-start host-bridge
    Network host-bridge started

    $ sudo virsh net-autostart host-bridge
    Network host-bridge marked as autostarted
    ```

1. Verify libvirt networks:

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh net-list --all
    Name          State    Autostart   Persistent
    ------------------------------------------------
    default       active   yes         yes
    host-bridge   active   yes         yes
    ```

### Create VMs

1. Create ssh keys to use with the cluster

    ```bash
    sudo ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -f /root/.ssh/k8s_ed25519 -C "baremetal-k8s"
    ```

1. Read, validate and edit the [`Vagrantfile`](./Vagrantfile) to your needs

you might want to change the following:

- WORKER_COUNT: the number of worker nodes to create (total node count)
= 1 master + WORKER_COUNT
- cpu count & memory size

    ```ruby
    libvirt.cpus = 2
    libvirt.memory = 4096
    ```

    2GB RAM works but complex deployments will run out of memory

1. Create the VMs

    ```console
    $ sudo vagrant up
    ...
    ==> worker-1: Machine booted and ready!
    ==> master: Machine booted and ready!
    ==> worker-1: Setting hostname...
    ==> master: Setting hostname...
    ==> worker-2: Machine booted and ready!
    ==> worker-2: Setting hostname...
    ==> master: Configuring and enabling network interfaces...
    ==> worker-1: Configuring and enabling network interfaces...
    ==> worker-2: Configuring and enabling network interfaces...
    ```

1. Verify VMs are running

    ```console
    $ sudo virsh list --all
     Id   Name                     State
    -----------------------------------------
     1    baremetal-k8s_master     running
     2    baremetal-k8s_worker-1   running
     3    baremetal-k8s_worker-2   running
     ...
    ```

1. Verify `master` is live on `br0`

    ```console
    $ ping 192.168.1.170
    PING 192.168.1.170 (192.168.1.170) 56(84) bytes of data.
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.285 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=2 ttl=64 time=0.241 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=3 ttl=64 time=0.243 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=4 ttl=64 time=0.568 ms
    64 bytes from 192.168.1.170: icmp_seq=5 ttl=64 time=0.174 ms
    ^C
    --- 192.168.1.170 ping statistics ---
    5 packets transmitted, 5 received, 0% packet loss, time 4093ms
    rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 0.174/0.302/0.568/0.137 ms
    ```

## Installing Kubernetes

1. edit [`hosts`](./hosts) to match the IPs you picked for your cluster,  
    or add or remove worker nodes according to the WORKER_COUNT you picked
1.
